new channels article (#274)
nim-lang/website: jekyll/_posts/2021-03-12-new-Nim-channels.md

---

title: "The new Nim channels implementation for ORC"
author: xflywind
excerpt: "The new channels library is efficient and safe to use"

---

# The new Nim channels implementation for ORC

> Version 1.4 ships with the so-called ORC memory management algorithm. ORC is the existing ARC algorithm (first shipped in version 1.2) plus a cycle collector. The Nim devel branch introduces a new module called `std/isolation`, which allows us to pass `isolated` data to threads safely and easily - it prevents data races at compile time. Another recent addition to the devel branch is `std/channels`, which is designed for ORC. It combines `isolated` data and `channels`, and is efficient and safe to use.

Reviewer: Also, I think there should be a part explaining what isolated data even is, something like:
```markdown
An `Isolated[T]` value owns data of type `T` that no one else has access to - hence it is isolated. This is also called an isolated subgraph.
```

> Version 1.4 ships with the so-called ORC memory management algorithm. ORC is the existing ARC algorithm (first shipped in version 1.2) plus a cycle collector. The Nim devel branch introduces a new module called `std/isolation`, which allows us to pass `isolated` data to threads safely and easily - it prevents data races at compile time. Another recent addition to the devel branch is `std/channels`, which is designed for ORC. It combines `isolated` data and `channels`, and is efficient and safe to use.

Reviewer 2: thanks

> Version 1.4 ships with the so-called ORC memory management algorithm. ORC is the existing ARC algorithm (first shipped in version 1.2) plus a cycle collector. The Nim devel branch introduces a new module called `std/isolation`, which allows us to pass `isolated` data to threads safely and easily - it prevents data races at compile time. Another recent addition to the devel branch is `std/channels`, which is designed for ORC. It combines `isolated` data and `channels`, and is efficient and safe to use.

Reviewer: What about an explanation for `Isolated`?

> Version 1.4 ships with the so-called ORC memory management algorithm. ORC is the existing ARC algorithm (first shipped in version 1.2) plus a cycle collector. The Nim devel branch introduces a new module called `std/isolation`, which allows us to pass `isolated` data to threads safely and easily - it prevents data races at compile time. Another recent addition to the devel branch is `std/channels`, which is designed for ORC. It combines `isolated` data and `channels`, and is efficient and safe to use.

Reviewer 2: fixed, thanks

> **Note:** at the time of writing, to compile the below code you need to use a development version of the Nim compiler (from 2021-03-12 or later). However, it should also work in Nim 1.6.0 or later. 

Reviewer 2: thanks

```

**app.nim**

The main thread prepares tasks by reading `todo_urls.json`, and then it sends JSON data to a channel. The crawl thread does the actual work - it receives URL data from the channel and downloads the contents using the `httpclient` module.

```nim
import std/channels
import std/[httpclient, isolation, json]
var ch = newChannel[JsonNode]() # we need to send JsonNode
proc download(client: HttpClient, url: string) =
  let response = client.get(url)
  echo "content: ", response.body[0 .. 20] # prints the results
proc crawl =
  var client = newHttpClient() # the crawler
  defer: client.close()
  let data = ch.recv() # the JSON data
  if data != nil:
    for url in data["url"]:
      download(client, url.getStr)
proc prepareTasks(fileWithUrls: string): seq[Isolated[JsonNode]] =
  result = @[]
  for line in lines(fileWithUrls):
    result.add isolate(parseJson(line)) # parse JSON file
proc spawnCrawlers =
  var tasks = prepareTasks("todo_urls.json")
  for t in mitems tasks: # we need a mutable view of the items
    ch.send move t
var thr: Thread[void]
createThread(thr, crawl) # create crawl thread
spawnCrawlers()
joinThread(thr)
```

First, we import `std/channels`.

> Then we can create a channel using `newChannel`, which returns a `Channel[T]`. It uses `mpmc` internally, which stands for "multiple producer, multiple consumer". The `elements` parameter is used to specify whether a channel is buffered or not. For an unbuffered channel, the sender and the receiver block until the other side is ready. Sending data to a buffered channel blocks only when the buffer is full. Receiving data from a buffered channel blocks when the buffer is empty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we can create a channel using `newChannel`, which returns a `Channel[T]`. It uses MPMC internally, which stands for "multiple producer, multiple consumer". The `elements` parameter is used to specify whether a channel is buffered or not. For an unbuffered channel, the sender and the receiver block until the other side is ready. Sending data to a buffered channel blocks only when the buffer is full. Receiving data from a buffered channel blocks when the buffer is empty.
```

`newChannel` is a generic proc - you can specify the types of the data you want to send or receive.

```nim
var chan1 = newChannel[int]()
# or
var chan2 = newChannel[string](elements = 1) # unbuffered channel
# or
var chan3 = newChannel[seq[string]](elements = 30) # buffered channel
```

> The `send` proc takes data that we want to send to the channel. The passed data is moved around, not copied. Because `chan.send(isolate(data))` is very common to use, `template send[T](c: var Chan[T]; src: T) = chan.send(isolate(src))` is provided for convenience. For example, you can use `chan.send("Hello World")` instead of `chan.send(isolate("Hello World!"))`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `send` proc takes data that we want to send to the channel. The passed data is moved around, not copied. Because `chan.send(isolate(data))` is very common to use, `template send[T](c: var Channel[T]; src: T) = c.send(isolate(src))` is provided for convenience. For example, you can use `chan.send("Hello world")` instead of `chan.send(isolate("Hello world!"))`.
```

> There are two useful procs for a receiver: `recv` and `tryRecv`. `recv` blocks until something is sent to the channel. In contrast, `tryRecv` doesn't block - if no message exists in the channel, it just fails and returns `false`. We can write a while loop to call `tryRecv`and handle a message when available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two useful procs for a receiver: `recv` and `tryRecv`. `recv` blocks until something is sent to the channel. In contrast, `tryRecv` doesn't block - if no message exists in the channel, it just fails and returns `false`. We can write a while loop to call `tryRecv` and handle a message when available.
```

### It is safe and convenient

> The Nim compiler rejects the program below at compile time. It says that `expression cannot be isolated: s`. This is because `s` is a `ref object` - it may be modified somewhere and is not unique, so the variable cannot be isolated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Nim compiler rejects the program below. It says that `expression cannot be isolated: s`. This is because `s` is a `ref object` - it may be modified somewhere and is not unique, so the variable cannot be isolated.
```
The "at compile time" is redundant, since the Nim *compiler* rejects it, alternatively, one could write "The program below is rejected at compile time".

```nim
import std/[channels, json, isolation]

var chan = newChannel[JsonNode]()

proc spawnCrawlers =
  var s = newJString("Hello, Nim")
  chan.send isolate(s) # compile time error
  chan.send unsafeIsolate(s) # ok: user's responsability to check that `s` isn't mutated
```

It is only allowed to pass a function call directly.

```nim
import std/[channels, json, isolation]

var chan = newChannel[JsonNode]()

proc spawnCrawlers =
  chan.send isolate(newJString("Hello, Nim"))
```

`Isolated` data can only be moved, not copied. It is implemented as a library without bloating Nim's core type system. The `isolate` proc is used to create an isolated subgraph from the expression `value`. Whether the expression `value` is isolated is checked at compile time. The `extract` proc is used to get the internal value of `Isolated` data.

```nim
import std/isolation

var data = isolate("string")
doAssert data.extract == "string"

> doAssert data.extract == ""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
doAssert data.extract == "" # the value was moved
```

```

By means of `Isolated` data, the channels become safer and more convenient to use.

## Benchmark

> Here is a simple benchmark. We create 40 threads that send data to the channel and 5/10/20 threads that receive it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a simple benchmark. We create 40 threads that send data to the channel and 5/10/20 threads that receive from it.
```

```nim
# benchmark the new channel implementation with 
# `nim r --threads:on --gc:orc -d:newChan -d:danger app.nim`
#
# benchmark the old channel implementation with
# `nim r --threads:on -d:oldChan -d:danger app.nim`

import std/times

var
  sender: array[40, Thread[void]]
  receiver: array[5, Thread[void]]
  # receiver: array[10, Thread[void]]  # with 10 threads
  # receiver: array[20, Thread[void]]  # with 20 threads
when defined(newChan):
  import std/[channels, isolation]
  var chan = newChannel[seq[string]](40)
elif defined(oldChan):
  var chan: Channel[seq[string]]
  chan.open(maxItems = 40)

proc recvHandler() =
  let x = chan.recv()
  discard x

proc sendHandler() =
  chan.send(@["Hello, Nim"])
template benchmark() =
  for t in mitems(sender):
    t.createThread(sendHandler)
  joinThreads(sender)
  for i in 0 .. receiver.high:
    createThread(receiver[i], recvHandler)

>   let start = now()

Reviewer 3: see https://github.com/nim-lang/Nim/pull/17405

> proc sendHandler() =
>   chan.send(@["Hello, Nim"])
> template benchmark() =
>   for t in mitems(sender):
>     t.createThread(sendHandler)
>   joinThreads(sender)
>   for i in 0 .. receiver.high:
>     createThread(receiver[i], recvHandler)
>   let start = now()
>   joinThreads(receiver)
>   echo now() - start
> benchmark()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
proc sendHandler() =
  chan.send(@["Hello, Nim"])

template benchmark() =
  for t in mitems(sender):
    t.createThread(sendHandler)
  joinThreads(sender)
  for i in 0 .. receiver.high:
    createThread(receiver[i], recvHandler)
  let start = now()
  joinThreads(receiver)
  echo now() - start

benchmark()
```
(newlines around the template definition)

```

**app.nim**

The main thread prepares tasks by reading `todo_urls.json`, and then it sends JSON data to a channel. The crawl thread does the actual work - it receives URL data from the channel and downloads the contents using the `httpclient` module.

```nim
import std/channels
import std/[httpclient, isolation, json]
var ch = newChannel[JsonNode]() # we need to send JsonNode
proc download(client: HttpClient, url: string) =
  let response = client.get(url)
  echo "content: ", response.body[0 .. 20] # prints the results
proc crawl =
  var client = newHttpClient() # the crawler
  defer: client.close()
  let data = ch.recv() # the JSON data
  if data != nil:
    for url in data["url"]:
      download(client, url.getStr)
proc prepareTasks(fileWithUrls: string): seq[Isolated[JsonNode]] =
  result = @[]
  for line in lines(fileWithUrls):
    result.add isolate(parseJson(line)) # parse JSON file
proc spawnCrawlers =
  var tasks = prepareTasks("todo_urls.json")
  for t in mitems tasks: # we need a mutable view of the items
    ch.send move t
var thr: Thread[void]
createThread(thr, crawl) # create crawl thread
spawnCrawlers()
joinThread(thr)
```

First, we import `std/channels`.

> Then we can create a channel using `newChannel`, which returns a `Channel[T]`. It uses MPMC internally, which stands for "multiple producer, multiple consumer". The `elements` parameter is used to specify whether a channel is buffered or not. For an unbuffered channel, the sender and the receiver block until the other side is ready. Sending data to a buffered channel blocks only when the buffer is full. Receiving data from a buffered channel blocks when the buffer is empty.
> 
> `newChannel` is a generic proc - you can specify the types of the data you want to send or receive.

Reviewer 4: It would be nice to provide `newChannel` declaration here and expand the explanation a bit, since the mentioned parameter is not used in the text previously. Also, I've lifted the note on genericity up to the declaration description paragraph. Also, I don't think this is the right place to mention MPMC as it breaks the flow of folowing the code example above. It's probably better to mention it in the Background section.

````suggestion
Then we can create a channel using `newChannel` proc with the following signature:
```nim
proc newChannel*[T](elements = 30): Channel[T]
```
The new Nim channel is based on MPMC queue architecture internally, which stands for "multiple producer, multiple consumer". As you can see, `newChannel` is a generic proc - you can specify the type of the data you want to send or receive. The proc returns a `Channel[T]` and takes a single parameter `elements` with 30 as the default and which is used to specify whether a channel is buffered (`elements` = 1) or not (`elements` > 1). For an unbuffered channel, the sender and the receiver block until the other side is ready. Sending data to a buffered channel blocks only when the buffer is full. Receiving data from a buffered channel blocks when the buffer is empty.

Here's three examples of initializing a channel:
````

Reviewer 2: thanks!

---

title: "The new Nim channels implementation for ORC"
author: xflywind
excerpt: "The new channels library is efficient and safe to use"

---

# The new Nim channels implementation for ORC

Version 1.4 ships with the so-called ORC memory management algorithm. ORC is the existing ARC algorithm (first shipped in version 1.2) plus a cycle collector. The Nim devel branch introduces a new module called `std/isolation`, which allows us to pass `isolated` data to threads safely and easily - it prevents data races at compile time. Another recent addition to the devel branch is `std/channels`, which is designed for ORC. It combines `isolated` data and `channels`, and is efficient and safe to use.

**Note:** at the time of writing, to compile the below code you need to use a development version of the Nim compiler (from 2021-03-12 or later). However, it should also work in Nim 1.6.0 or later. 

## Background

> A channel is a model for sharing memory via message passing. A thread is able to send or receive messages over a channel. It's like sending a letter to your friend: the postman is the channel, and your friend is the receiver. You might already know `system/channels`, which is the old channels implementation. What's better in the new implementation? With the old one, first you need to copy your letter and send the copy to your friend. Then your friend may mark something on the copied letter and it won't affect the original. This works fine, but it is not efficient. If you use the new implementation, you only need to put your letter in the mailbox. No need to copy it!

Reviewer 3: system/channels
=>
system/channels_builtin

(that PR got merged already; this article should reflect current reality)

Reviewer 2: fixed

## The advantages

- Designed for ARC/ORC, no legacy code
- No need to `deepCopy`, just move data around
- No data races
- Based on [Michael & Scott lock-based queues](https://www.cs.rochester.edu/~scott/papers/1996_PODC_queues.pdf)

## Explore the new channels

**Note:** Be sure to compile your code with `--gc:orc –-threads:on -d:ssl`.

### Let's crawl the web

**todo_urls.json**

```json
{"url": ["https://google.com", "https://nim-lang.org"]}
```

**app.nim**

The main thread prepares tasks by reading `todo_urls.json`, and then it sends JSON data to a channel. The crawl thread does the actual work - it receives URL data from the channel and downloads the contents using the `httpclient` module.

```nim
import std/channels
import std/[httpclient, isolation, json]

> var ch = newChannel[JsonNode]() # we need to send JsonNode

Reviewer: Why is this marked as resolved?

proc download(client: HttpClient, url: string) =
  let response = client.get(url)
  echo "content: ", response.body[0 .. 20] # prints the results

proc crawl =
  var client = newHttpClient() # the crawler
  var data: JsonNode
  ch.recv(data) # the JSON data
  if data != nil:
    for url in data["url"]:
      download(client, url.getStr)

>   client.close()

Reviewer 3: if code above raises (eg wrong url, etc), this won't be called.
How about:
```nim
var client = newHttpClient() # the crawler
defer: client.close()
```

Reviewer 2: fixed

proc prepareTasks(fileWithUrls: string): seq[Isolated[JsonNode]] =
  result = @[]
  for line in lines(fileWithUrls):
    result.add isolate(parseJson(line)) # parse JSON file

proc spawnCrawlers =

>   var tasks = prepareTasks("todo_urls.json")

Reviewer 3: how about making this test self-contained by using a string instead of a file:
```nim
var tasks = prepareTasks("""
{"url": ["https://google.com", "https://nim-lang.org"]}
{"url": ["https://github.com/nim-lang/Nim"]}
""")
```
furthermore, I'd recommended making it even simpler by making 1 task = 1 url:

```nim
var tasks = prepareTasks("""
https://google.com
https://nim-lang.org
https://github.com/nim-lang/Nim
""")
```

(since the added complexity has nothing to do with std/channels)

# or
var chan3 = newChannel[seq[string]](elements = 30) # buffered channel
```

The `send` proc takes data that we want to send to the channel. The passed data is moved around, not copied. Because `chan.send(isolate(data))` is very common to use, `template send[T](c: var Chan[T]; src: T) = chan.send(isolate(src))` is provided for convenience. For example, you can use `chan.send("Hello World")` instead of `chan.send(isolate("Hello World!"))`.

There are two useful procs for a receiver: `recv` and `tryRecv`. `recv` blocks until something is sent to the channel. In contrast, `tryRecv` doesn't block - if no message exists in the channel, it just fails and returns `false`. We can write a while loop to call `tryRecv`and handle a message when available.

### It is safe and convenient

The Nim compiler rejects the program below at compile time. It says that `expression cannot be isolated: s`. This is because `s` is a `ref object` - it may be modified somewhere and is not unique, so the variable cannot be isolated.

```nim
import std/[channels, json, isolation]

var chan = newChannel[JsonNode]()

proc spawnCrawlers =
  var s = newJString("Hello, Nim")

>   chan.send isolate(s)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  chan.send isolate(s) # CT error
  chan.send unsafeIsolate(s) # ok: user's responsability to check that `s` isn't mutated
```

Reviewer 2: fixed

```

It is only allowed to pass a function call directly.

```nim
import std/[channels, json, isolation]

var chan = newChannel[JsonNode]()

proc spawnCrawlers =
  chan.send isolate(newJString("Hello, Nim"))
```

`Isolated` data can only be moved, not copied. It is implemented as a library without bloating Nim's core type system. The `isolate` proc is used to create an isolated subgraph from the expression `value`. Whether the expression `value` is isolated is checked at compile time. The `extract` proc is used to get the internal value of `Isolated` data.

```nim
import std/isolation

var data = isolate("string")
doAssert data.extract == "string"
doAssert data.extract == ""
```

By means of `Isolated` data, the channels become safer and more convenient to use.

## Benchmark

Here is a simple benchmark. We create 10 threads that send data to the channel and 5 threads that receive it.

```nim
# benchmark the new channel implementation with 

> # `nim c -r --threads:on --gc:orc -d:newChan -d:danger app.nim`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# `nim r --threads:on --gc:orc -d:newChan -d:danger app.nim`
```

#
# benchmark the old channel implementation with

> # `nim c -r --threads:on -d:oldChan -d:danger app.nim`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# `nim r --threads:on -d:oldChan -d:danger app.nim`
```

import std/times

var

>   sender: array[0 .. 9, Thread[void]]
>   receiver: array[0 .. 4, Thread[void]] 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  sender: array[10, Thread[void]]
  receiver: array[5, Thread[void]] 
```

(simpler is better)

when defined(newChan):
  import std/[channels, isolation]
  var chan = newChannel[seq[string]](40)

  proc sendHandler() =

>     chan.send(isolate(@["Hello, Nim"]))

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    chan.send(@["Hello, Nim"])
```
because `send` template does this for you.
Then you can move `sendHandler` outside of the contional `when defined(newChan):` since that code becomes identical.

Simpler = better.

Reviewer 2: fixed

  proc recvHandler() =

>     var x: seq[string]

Reviewer 3: can't we add a template recv that does that, that way the code also becomes identical (simpler = better). There is a recvIso but we could simply have: `recv` that auto-extracts so signature stays simple.

    chan.recv(x)
    discard x

elif defined(oldChan):
  var chan: Channel[seq[string]]

  chan.open(maxItems = 40)

  proc sendHandler() =
    chan.send(@["Hello, Nim"])
  proc recvHandler() =
    let x = chan.recv()
    discard x

template benchmark() =

>   for i in 0 .. sender.high:
>     createThread(sender[i], sendHandler)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  for t in mitems(sender):
    t.createThread(sendHandler)
```

ditto elsewhere.

  joinThreads(sender)
  for i in 0 .. receiver.high:
    createThread(receiver[i], recvHandler)

  let start = now()
  joinThreads(receiver)
  echo now() - start

benchmark()
```

The new implementation is much faster than the old one!

| Implementation                     | Elapsed time |
| ---------------------------------- | -----------: |
| system/channels + refc (-d:danger) |       433 μs |

> | std/channels + orc (-d:danger)     |       137 μs |

Reviewer 3: * use `system/channels_builtin` (that PR was already merged)
* not apples to apples comparison, you'd also need to compare with:
system/channels_builtin + orc (-d:danger)

Reviewer 2: a bit improvement

## Summary

> The new channels implementation makes ORC suitable for sharing data between threads. Data races are detected at compile time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The new channels implementation makes ORC suitable for sharing data between threads. Data races are prevented at compile time by sending isolated subgraphs checked at compile time.
```

**Note:** at the time of writing, to compile the below code you need to use a development version of the Nim compiler (from 2021-03-12 or later). However, it should also work in Nim 1.6.0 or later. 

## Background

A channel is a model for sharing memory via message passing. A thread is able to send or receive messages over a channel. It's like sending a letter to your friend: the postman is the channel, and your friend is the receiver. You might already know `system/channels`, which is the old channels implementation. What's better in the new implementation? With the old one, first you need to copy your letter and send the copy to your friend. Then your friend may mark something on the copied letter and it won't affect the original. This works fine, but it is not efficient. If you use the new implementation, you only need to put your letter in the mailbox. No need to copy it!

## The advantages

- Designed for ARC/ORC, no legacy code
- No need to `deepCopy`, just move data around
- No data races

> - Based on [Michael & Scott lock-based queues](https://www.cs.rochester.edu/~scott/papers/1996_PODC_queues.pdf)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Explore the new channels

**Note:** Be sure to compile your code with `--gc:orc –-threads:on -d:ssl`.

### Let's crawl the web

**todo_urls.json**

```json
{"url": ["https://google.com", "https://nim-lang.org"]}
```

**app.nim**

The main thread prepares tasks by reading `todo_urls.json`, and then it sends JSON data to a channel. The crawl thread does the actual work - it receives URL data from the channel and downloads the contents using the `httpclient` module.

```nim

> import std/channels
> import std/[httpclient, isolation, json]
> 
> var ch = newChannel[JsonNode]() # we need to send JsonNode
> 
> proc download(client: HttpClient, url: string) =
>   let response = client.get(url)
>   echo "content: ", response.body[0 .. 20] # prints the results
> 
> proc crawl =
>   var client = newHttpClient() # the crawler
>   defer: client.close()
>   var data: JsonNode
>   ch.recv(data) # the JSON data
>   if data != nil:
>     for url in data["url"]:
>       download(client, url.getStr)
> 
> proc prepareTasks(fileWithUrls: string): seq[Isolated[JsonNode]] =
>   result = @[]
>   for line in lines(fileWithUrls):
>     result.add isolate(parseJson(line)) # parse JSON file
> 
> proc spawnCrawlers =
>   var tasks = prepareTasks("todo_urls.json")
>   for t in mitems tasks: # we need a mutable view of the items
>     ch.send move t
> 
> var thr: Thread[void]
> createThread(thr, crawl) # create crawl thread
> 
> spawnCrawlers()
> joinThread(thr)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import std/channels
import std/[httpclient, isolation, json]
var ch = newChannel[JsonNode]() # we need to send JsonNode
proc download(client: HttpClient, url: string) =
  let response = client.get(url)
  echo "content: ", response.body[0 .. 20] # prints the results
proc crawl =
  var client = newHttpClient() # the crawler
  defer: client.close()
  let data = ch.recv() # the JSON data
  if data != nil:
    for url in data["url"]:
      download(client, url.getStr)
proc prepareTasks(fileWithUrls: string): seq[Isolated[JsonNode]] =
  result = @[]
  for line in lines(fileWithUrls):
    result.add isolate(parseJson(line)) # parse JSON file
proc spawnCrawlers =
  var tasks = prepareTasks("todo_urls.json")
  for t in mitems tasks: # we need a mutable view of the items
    ch.send move t
var thr: Thread[void]
createThread(thr, crawl) # create crawl thread
spawnCrawlers()
joinThread(thr)
```

```

It is only allowed to pass a function call directly.

```nim
import std/[channels, json, isolation]

var chan = newChannel[JsonNode]()

proc spawnCrawlers =
  chan.send isolate(newJString("Hello, Nim"))
```

`Isolated` data can only be moved, not copied. It is implemented as a library without bloating Nim's core type system. The `isolate` proc is used to create an isolated subgraph from the expression `value`. Whether the expression `value` is isolated is checked at compile time. The `extract` proc is used to get the internal value of `Isolated` data.

```nim
import std/isolation

var data = isolate("string")
doAssert data.extract == "string"
doAssert data.extract == ""
```

By means of `Isolated` data, the channels become safer and more convenient to use.

## Benchmark

Here is a simple benchmark. We create 40 threads that send data to the channel and 5/10/20 threads that receive it.

```nim
# benchmark the new channel implementation with 
# `nim r --threads:on --gc:orc -d:newChan -d:danger app.nim`
#
# benchmark the old channel implementation with
# `nim r --threads:on -d:oldChan -d:danger app.nim`

> import std/times
> 
> var
>   sender: array[40, Thread[void]]
>   receiver: array[5, Thread[void]]
>   # receiver: array[10, Thread[void]]  # with 10 threads
>   # receiver: array[20, Thread[void]]  # with 20 threads
> 
> when defined(newChan):
>   import std/[channels, isolation]
>   var chan = newChannel[seq[string]](40)
> 
>   proc recvHandler() =
>     var x: seq[string]
>     chan.recv(x)
>     discard x
> 
> elif defined(oldChan):
>   var chan: Channel[seq[string]]
> 
>   chan.open(maxItems = 40)
> 
>   proc recvHandler() =
>     let x = chan.recv()
>     discard x
> 
> proc sendHandler() =
>   chan.send(@["Hello, Nim"])
> 
> template benchmark() =
>   for t in mitems(sender):
>     t.createThread(sendHandler)
> 
>   joinThreads(sender)
>   for i in 0 .. receiver.high:
>     createThread(receiver[i], recvHandler)
> 
>   let start = now()
>   joinThreads(receiver)
>   echo now() - start
> 
> benchmark()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import std/times
var
  sender: array[40, Thread[void]]
  receiver: array[5, Thread[void]]
  # receiver: array[10, Thread[void]]  # with 10 threads
  # receiver: array[20, Thread[void]]  # with 20 threads
when defined(newChan):
  import std/[channels, isolation]
  var chan = newChannel[seq[string]](40)
elif defined(oldChan):
  var chan: Channel[seq[string]]
  chan.open(maxItems = 40)

proc recvHandler() =
  let x = chan.recv()
  discard x

proc sendHandler() =
  chan.send(@["Hello, Nim"])
template benchmark() =
  for t in mitems(sender):
    t.createThread(sendHandler)
  joinThreads(sender)
  for i in 0 .. receiver.high:
    createThread(receiver[i], recvHandler)
  let start = now()
  joinThreads(receiver)
  echo now() - start
benchmark()
```

---

title: "The new Nim channels implementation for ORC"
author: xflywind
excerpt: "The new channels library is efficient and safe to use"

---

# The new Nim channels implementation for ORC

> Version 1.4 ships with the so-called ORC memory management algorithm. ORC is the existing ARC algorithm (first shipped in version 1.2) plus a cycle collector. The Nim devel branch also introduces a new module called `std/isolation`. With it we can pass `isolated` data to threads safely and easily. It prevents data races at compile time. Recently `std/channels` is merged to the devel branch which is designed for ORC. It combines `isolated` data and `channels` and is efficient and safe to use.

Reviewer 2: thanks

**Note:** you need the Nim devel branch to compile the code below.

## Background

> A channel is a model for sharing memory via message passing. A thread is able to send or receive messages over a channel. It's like sending a letter to your friend. The postman is the channel. Your friend is the receiver. You probably already know `system/channels`. What's the difference between the new channels implementation and the old one? If you use the old one, you will need to copy your letter by hand first and send the copy to your friend. Then your friend may mark something on the copied letter and it won't affect the original. This works fine, however it is not efficient. If you use the new implementation, you will only need to put your letter in the mailbox. No need to copy it!

Reviewer 2: thanks

> A channel is a model for sharing memory via message passing. A thread is able to send or receive messages over a channel. It's like sending a letter to your friend. The postman is the channel. Your friend is the receiver.  You may know  `system/channels` already exists. What’s the difference between new channels implementation and the old one? If you use the old one, you need to copy your letter by hand first and send the copied one to your friend instead. Then your friend may mark something on the copied letter, it won’t affect the original letter. It works fine, however it is not efficient. If you use the new one, you only need to put your letter in the mailbox. No need to copy your letter!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A channel is a model for sharing memory via message passing. A thread is able to send or receive messages over a channel. It's like sending a letter to your friend. The postman is the channel. Your friend is the receiver. You probably already know `system/channels`. What’s the difference between the new channels implementation and the old one? If you use the old one, you will need to copy your letter by hand first and send the copy to your friend. Then your friend may mark something on the copied letter and it won’t affect the original. This works fine, however it is not efficient. If you use the new implementation, you will only need to put your letter in the mailbox. No need to copy it!
```

## The advantages

- Designed for ARC/ORC, no legacy code
- No need to `deepCopy`, just move data around
- No data races

> - Based on [Michael & Scott lock-based queues](https://www.cs.rochester.edu/~scott/papers/1996_PODC_queues.pdf)

Reviewer 3: indeed, it feels weird to put this under advantages; it should be under `background`

## Explore the new channels

**Note:** Be sure to compile your code with `--gc:orc –-threads:on`.

### Let's crawl the web

**todo_urls.json**

```json
{"url": ["https://google.com", "https://nim-lang.org"]}
```

**app.nim**

> The main thread prepares tasks via reading `todo_urls.txt`. Then it sends JSON data to a channel. The crawl thread does the crawlers' work. It receives URL data from the channel and downloads the contents using `httpclient`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The main thread prepares tasks by reading `todo_urls.txt`. Then it sends JSON data to a channel. The crawl thread does the actual work - it receives URL data from the channel and downloads the contents using the `httpclient` module.
```

```nim
import std/channels
import std/[httpclient, isolation, json]

> 
> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

```

?

var ch = initChan[JsonNode]() # we need to send JsonNode

proc download(client: HttpClient, url: string) =
  let response = client.get(url)
  echo "content: ", response.body[0 .. 20] # prints the results

proc crawl =
  var client = newHttpClient() # the crawler
  var data: JsonNode
  ch.recv(data) # the JSON data
  if data != nil:
    for url in data["url"]:
      download(client, url.getStr)
  client.close()

proc prepareTasks(fileWithUrls: string): seq[Isolated[JsonNode]] =
  result = @[]
  for line in lines(fileWithUrls):
    result.add isolate(parseJson(line)) # parse JSON file

proc spawnCrawlers  =
  var tasks = prepareTasks("todo_urls.json")

>   for t in mitems tasks: # we need a mutable view of the items"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  for t in mitems tasks: # we need a mutable view of the items
```

    ch.send move t

var thr: Thread[void]
createThread(thr, crawl) # create crawl thread

spawnCrawlers()
joinThread(thr)
```

First you need to import `std/channels`.

> Then you can create a channel using `initChan`. It uses `mpmc` internally which stands for multiple producer, multiple consumer. The `elements` parameter is used to specify whether a channel is buffered or not.  For unbuffered channel, the sender and the receiver block until the other side is ready. Sending data to a buffered channel blocks only when the buffer is full. Receiving data from a buffered channel blocks when the buffer is empty.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Then you can create a channel using `initChan`. It uses `mpmc` internally which stands for multiple producer, multiple consumer. The `elements` parameter is used to specify whether a channel is buffered or not.  For an unbuffered channel, the sender and the receiver block until the other side is ready. Sending data to a buffered channel blocks only when the buffer is full. Receiving data from a buffered channel blocks when the buffer is empty.
```

`initChan` is a generic proc, you can specify the types of the data you want to send or receive.

```nim
var chan1 = initChan[int]()
# or
var chan2 = initChan[string](elements = 1) # unbuffered channel
# or
var chan3 = initChan[seq[string]](elements = 30) # buffered channel
```

> `send` proc takes something we want to send to the channel.  The passed data is moved around, not copied. Because `chan.send(isolate(data))` is very common to use, `template send[T](c: var Chan[T]; src: T) = chan.send(isolate(src))` is provided for convenience. For example, you can use `chan.send("Hello World")` instead of `chan.send(isolate("Hello World!"))`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`send` proc takes data that we want to send to the channel. The passed data is moved around, not copied. Because `chan.send(isolate(data))` is used commonly, `template send[T](c: var Chan[T]; src: T) = chan.send(isolate(src))` is provided for convenience. For example, you can use `chan.send("Hello World")` instead of `chan.send(isolate("Hello World!"))`.
```

> There are two useful procs for a receiver: `recv` and `tryRecv`. `recv` blocks until something is sent to the channel. In contrast `tryRecv` doesn’t block. If no message exists in the channel, it just fails and returns `false`. We can write a while loop to call `tryRecv`and handle a message when available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two useful procs for a receiver: `recv` and `tryRecv`. `recv` blocks until something is sent to the channel. In contrast `tryRecv` doesn't block. If no message exists in the channel, it just fails and returns `false`. We can write a while loop to call `tryRecv`and handle a message when available.
```

###  It is safe and convenient

> The Nim compiler rejects the program below at compile time. It says that `expression cannot be isolated: s`. Because s is a ref object, may be modified somewhere and is not unique. So the variable cannot be isolated.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Nim compiler rejects the program below at compile time. It says that `expression cannot be isolated: s`. Because `s` is a `ref object`, it might be modified somewhere else and is not unique, so the variable cannot be isolated.
```

```nim
import std/[channels, json, isolation]

var chan = initChan[JsonNode]()

proc spawnCrawlers  =
  var s = newJString("Hello, Nim")
  chan.send isolate(s)
```

It is only allowed to pass a function call directly.

```nim
import std/[channels, json, isolation]

var chan = initChan[JsonNode]()

proc spawnCrawlers  =
  chan.send isolate(newJString("Hello, Nim"))
```

> `Isolated` data can only be moved, not copied. It is implemented as a library without bloating Nim's core type system. The `isolate` proc is used to create an isolated subgraph from the expression `value`. The expression `value` is checked at compile time . The `extract` proc is used to get the internal value of `Isolated` data. 

Reviewer 5: "checked at compile time" for what?

```nim
import std/isolation

var data = isolate("string")
doAssert data.extract == "string"
doAssert data.extract == ""
```

> By means of `Isolated` data, the channels become safe and convenient to use.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
With `Isolated`, channels become safer and more convenient to use.
```

## Benchmark

> Here is a simple benchmark. We create 10 threads for sending data to the channel and 5 threads for receiving data from the channel.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Here is a simple benchmark. We create 10 threads that send data to the channel and 5 threads that receive it.
```

```nim
# benchmark the new channel implementation with 
# `nim c -r --threads:on --gc:orc -d:newChan -d:danger app.nim`
#
# benchmark the old channel implementation with
# `nim c -r --threads:on -d:oldChan -d:danger app.nim`

import std/[os, times, isolation]

var
  sender: array[0 .. 9, Thread[void]]
  receiver: array[0 .. 4, Thread[void]] 

> 
> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

```

?

  import std/channels
  var chan = initChan[seq[string]](40)

  proc sendHandler() =
    chan.send(isolate(@["Hello, Nim"]))

  proc recvHandler() =
    var x: seq[string]
    chan.recv(x)
    discard x

elif defined(oldChan):
  var chan: Channel[seq[string]]

  chan.open(maxItems = 40)

  proc sendHandler() =
    chan.send(@["Hello, Nim"])

  proc recvHandler() =
    let x = chan.recv()
    discard x

template benchmark() =
  for i in 0 .. sender.high:
    createThread(sender[i], sendHandler)

  joinThreads(sender)

  for i in 0 .. receiver.high:
    createThread(receiver[i], recvHandler)

  let start = now()
  joinThreads(receiver)
  echo now() - start

benchmark()
```

The new implementation is much faster than the old one!

| Implementation                    | Time                                 |
| --------------------------------- | ------------------------------------ |
| system/channels + refc(-d:danger) | 433 microseconds and 590 nanoseconds |
| std/channels + orc(-d:danger)     | 137 microseconds and 522 nanoseconds |

## Summary

The new channels implementation makes ORC suitable for sharing data between threads. Data races are detected at compile time.

> If you use latest Nim version, you can run the example above and experiment `std/channels` with your own programs. Please try it out and give us your feedback!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If you use the latest devel, you can run the example above and experiment with `std/channels` in your own programs. Please try it out and give us your feedback!
```

---

title: "The new Nim channels implementation for ORC"
author: xflywind
excerpt: "The new channels library is efficient and safe to use"

---

# The new Nim channels implementation for ORC

> Version 1.4 ships with the so-called ORC memory management algorithm. ORC is the existing ARC algorithm (first shipped in version 1.2) plus a cycle collector. The Nim devel branch also introduces a new module called `std/isolation`. With it we can pass `isolated` data to threads safely and easily. It prevents data races at compile time. Recently `std/channels` is merged to the devel branch which is designed for ORC. It combines `isolated` data and `channels` and is efficient and safe to use.

Reviewer 3: can you use semantic line breaks ? (see https://sembr.org/#:~:text=Semantic%20Line%20Breaks%20describe%20a,consecutive%20lines%20with%20a%20space.)

(avoids long lines which are not git diff-friendly, and also avoids the silliness of line breaks at a fixed 80 col limit)

**Note:** you need the Nim devel branch to compile the code below.

## Background

> A channel is a model for sharing memory via message passing. A thread is able to send or receive messages over a channel. It’s like sending a letter to your friend. The postman is the channel. Your friend is the receiver.  You may know  `system/channels` already exists. What’s the difference between new channels implementation and the old one? If you use the old one, you need to copy your letter by hand first and send the copied one to your friend instead. Then your friend may mark something on the copied letter, it won’t affect the original letter. It works fine, however it is not efficient. If you use the new one, you only need to put your letter in the mailbox. No need to copy your letter!

Reviewer 3: `system/channels` => `system/channels_builtin`

Reviewer 2: waiting for my PR(need to see whether others disagree).

https://github.com/nim-lang/Nim/pull/17330

Reviewer 2: fixed

> A channel is a model for sharing memory via message passing. A thread is able to send or receive messages over a channel. It’s like sending a letter to your friend. The postman is the channel. Your friend is the receiver.  You may know  `system/channels` already exists. What’s the difference between new channels implementation and the old one? If you use the old one, you need to copy your letter by hand first and send the copied one to your friend instead. Then your friend may mark something on the copied letter, it won’t affect the original letter. It works fine, however it is not efficient. If you use the new one, you only need to put your letter in the mailbox. No need to copy your letter!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A channel is a model for sharing memory via message passing. A thread is able to send or receive messages over a channel. It's like sending a letter to your friend. The postman is the channel. Your friend is the receiver.  You may know  `system/channels` already exists. What’s the difference between new channels implementation and the old one? If you use the old one, you need to copy your letter by hand first and send the copied one to your friend instead. Then your friend may mark something on the copied letter, it won’t affect the original letter. It works fine, however it is not efficient. If you use the new one, you only need to put your letter in the mailbox. No need to copy your letter!
```

## The advantages

- Designed for ARC/ORC, no legacy code

> - No need to `deepcopy`, just move data around

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- No need to `deepCopy`, just move data around
```

- No data races
- Based on [Michael & Scott lock-based queues](https://www.cs.rochester.edu/~scott/papers/1996_PODC_queues.pdf)

## Explore the new channels

**Note:** Be sure to compile your code with `--gc:orc –-threads:on`.

### Let's crawl the web

**todo_urls.json**

```json
{"url": ["https://google.com", "https://nim-lang.org"]}
```

**app.nim**

> The main thread prepares tasks via reading `todo_urls.txt`. Then it sends JSON data to a channel. The crawl thread does the crawlers’ work. It receives URL data from the channel and downloads the contents using `httpclient`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The main thread prepares tasks via reading `todo_urls.txt`. Then it sends JSON data to a channel. The crawl thread does the crawlers' work. It receives URL data from the channel and downloads the contents using `httpclient`.
```

```nim
import std/channels
import std/[httpclient, isolation, json]

var ch = initChan[JsonNode]() # we need to send JsonNode

proc download(client: HttpClient, url: string) =
  let response = client.get(url)

>   echo "content: "
>   echo response.body[0 .. 20]  # prints the results

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  echo "content: ", response.body[0 .. 20] # prints the results
```

proc crawl =
  var client = newHttpClient() # the crawler
  var data: JsonNode
  ch.recv(data) # the JSON data

>   if data != nil:

Reviewer 3: can data ever be nil?
```
nim r --eval:'import std/json; echo parseJson("{}") == nil'
false
```

Reviewer 2: If `recv` doesn't modify data, it will be nil.

    for url in data["url"]:
      download(client, url.getStr)
  client.close()

proc prepareTasks(fileWithUrls: string): seq[Isolated[JsonNode]] =

>   result = @[]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 7: I really like explicit initialization. :-)

  for line in lines(fileWithUrls):
    result.add isolate(parseJson(line)) # parse JSON file

proc spawnCrawlers  =
  var tasks = prepareTasks("todo_urls.json")
  for t in mitems tasks: # we need a mutable view of the items"
    ch.send move t

var thr: Thread[void]
createThread(thr, crawl) # create crawl thread

spawnCrawlers()
joinThread(thr)
```

First you need to import `std/channels`.

> Then you can create a channel using `initChan`. It uses `mpmc` internally which stands for multiple producer, multiple consumer. The `elements` parameter is used to specify whether a channel is buffered or not.  For unbuffered channel, the sender and the receiver block until the other side is ready. Sending data to a buffered channel blocks only when the buffer is full. Receiving data from a buffered channel blocks when the buffer is empty.

Reviewer 3: `mpmc` =>  `MPMC` ?

> 

Reviewer 3: * specify the type: `initChan` returns a `Chan[T]`

Reviewer 2: fixed

> `initChan` is a generic proc, you can specify the types of the data you want to send or receive.

Reviewer 3: specify that `Chan` is bi-directional (is it?)
